docs/api-reference.md, before:

# API Reference

Base URL: `http://localhost:8080` (configurable via `server-config.yaml`)

## Public API

Task, job, and log endpoints do not require authentication. Auth endpoints are available when the server is configured with an `auth` section (see Configuration below).

---

### List Workspaces

```
GET /api/workspaces
```

Returns all configured workspaces with task and action counts.

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "name": "default",
    "task_count": 3,
    "action_count": 5
  },
  {
    "name": "data-team",
    "task_count": 2,
    "action_count": 4
  }
]
```

---

### List Tasks

```
GET /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks
```

Returns all tasks from the specified workspace.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hello-world",
    "workspace": "default",
    "mode": "distributed"
  },
  {
    "name": "deploy-pipeline",
    "workspace": "default",
    "mode": "distributed"
  }
]
```

---

### Get Task Detail

```
GET /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks/{name}
```

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)
- `name` -- Task name (e.g., `hello-world`)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "name": "hello-world",
  "mode": "distributed",
  "input": {
    "name": { "type": "string", "default": "World" }
  },
  "flow": {
    "say-hello": {
      "action": "greet",
      "input": { "name": "{{ input.name }}" }
    },
    "shout-it": {
      "action": "shout",
      "depends_on": ["say-hello"],
      "input": { "message": "{{ say_hello.output.greeting }}" }
    }
  }
}
```

---

### Execute Task

```
POST /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks/{name}/execute
```

Creates a new job for the given task in the specified workspace.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name
- `name` -- Task name

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "input": {
    "name": "World"
  }
}
```

The `input` object is matched against the task's input definition. Missing fields with defaults use the default value. Missing required fields cause an error.

**Response:**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Example:**

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/workspaces/default/tasks/hello-world/execute \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"input": {"name": "World"}}'
```

---

### List Jobs

```
GET /api/jobs
```

**Query parameters:**
- `workspace` (optional) -- Filter by workspace name
- `limit` (optional, default: `50`) -- Number of jobs to return
- `offset` (optional, default: `0`) -- Pagination offset

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
    "workspace": "default",
    "task_name": "hello-world",
    "mode": "distributed",
    "status": "completed",
    "source_type": "api",
    "source_id": null,
    "created_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:00Z",
    "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
    "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z"
  }
]
```

**Example:**

```bash
curl "http://localhost:8080/api/jobs?limit=10"
```

---

### Get Job Detail

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}
```

Returns job metadata and all steps with their statuses.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "workspace": "default",
  "task_name": "hello-world",
  "mode": "distributed",
  "input": { "name": "World" },
  "output": null,
  "status": "completed",
  "source_type": "api",
  "source_id": null,
  "created_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:00Z",
  "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
  "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z",
  "steps": [
    {
      "step_name": "say-hello",
      "action_name": "greet",
      "action_type": "shell",
      "action_image": null,
      "input": { "name": "World" },
      "output": { "greeting": "Hello World" },
      "status": "completed",
      "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
      "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
      "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:02Z",
      "error_message": null
    },
    {
      "step_name": "shout-it",
      "action_name": "shout",
      "action_type": "shell",
      "action_image": null,
      "input": { "message": "Hello World" },
      "output": null,
      "status": "completed",
      "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
      "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:02Z",
      "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z",
      "error_message": null
    }
  ]
}
```

**Job statuses:** `pending`, `running`, `completed`, `failed`, `cancelled`

**Step statuses:** `pending`, `ready`, `running`, `completed`, `failed`, `skipped`

- `skipped` -- The step was not executed because a dependency failed (or was itself skipped). Steps with `continue_on_failure: true` are promoted instead of skipped when dependencies fail.

---

### Get Job Logs

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/logs
```

Returns the combined log output from all steps of a job in JSONL format. Each line is a JSON object with `ts`, `stream`, `step`, and `line` fields.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "logs": "{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"Hello World\"}\n{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.456Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"OUTPUT: {\\\"greeting\\\": \\\"Hello World\\\"}\"}\n"
}
```

**JSONL line format:**

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `ts` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp of when the line was captured |
| `stream` | string | `"stdout"` or `"stderr"` |
| `step` | string | Step name that produced this line |
| `line` | string | The log line content |

**Backward compatibility:** For jobs created before JSONL format was introduced, the `logs` field may contain legacy plain text. Clients should attempt to parse each line as JSON and fall back to rendering plain text for unparseable lines.

**Example:**

```bash
curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/logs | jq -r .logs
```

---

### Get Step Logs

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/logs
```

Returns the JSONL log output for a specific step within a job. Lines are filtered by the `step` field in each JSON log entry.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Response:**

```json
{
  "logs": "{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"Hello World\"}\n"
}
```

For jobs created before JSONL log format was introduced, this endpoint returns an empty string (legacy plain-text lines are skipped).

**Example:**

```bash
curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/steps/say-hello/logs | jq -r .logs
```

---

### Stream Job Logs (WebSocket)

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/logs/stream
```

Opens a WebSocket connection for real-time log streaming. On connect, the server sends any existing log content (backfill), then streams new log chunks as they arrive from workers.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Protocol:** WebSocket (upgrade from HTTP)

**Behavior:**
1. Server sends existing JSONL log content as a text message (backfill)
2. Server forwards new JSONL log chunks as text messages in real-time
3. Connection stays open until the client disconnects or the server shuts down
4. Each message contains one or more JSONL lines (one JSON object per line)

**Example (websocat):**

```bash
websocat ws://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/logs/stream
```

**Error responses:**
- `400` -- Invalid job ID format

---

## Auth API

Auth endpoints are only available when the server is configured with an `auth` section. Without auth configuration, these endpoints return `404`.

---

### Login

```
POST /api/auth/login
```

Authenticates with email and password. Returns a JWT access token and a refresh token.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "email": "admin@stroem.local",
  "password": "admin"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...",
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Invalid email or password
- `404` -- Auth not configured on this server

**Example:**

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/auth/login \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"email": "admin@stroem.local", "password": "admin"}'
```

---

### Refresh Token

```
POST /api/auth/refresh
```

Exchanges a refresh token for a new access token and refresh token pair. The old refresh token is revoked (rotation).

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...",
  "refresh_token": "f1e2d3c4-b5a6-0987-dcba-0987654321fe"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Invalid or expired refresh token

---

### Logout

```
POST /api/auth/logout
```

Revokes a refresh token.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Get Current User

```
GET /api/auth/me
```

Returns the authenticated user's information. Requires a valid JWT access token.

**Headers:**

```
Authorization: Bearer <access_token>
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "user_id": "d1e2f3a4-b5c6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "name": null,
  "email": "admin@stroem.local",
  "created_at": "2025-02-11T10:00:00Z"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Missing or invalid access token

---

## Worker API

All worker endpoints require authentication via the `Authorization` header:

```
Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>
```

The token is configured in `server-config.yaml` (`worker_token` field) and must match the `worker_token` in `worker-config.yaml`.

---

### Register Worker

```
POST /worker/register
```

Registers a worker and returns a unique worker ID. Called once on worker startup.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "name": "worker-1",
  "capabilities": ["shell"]
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

---

### Heartbeat

```
POST /worker/heartbeat
```

Updates the worker's last-seen timestamp. Called periodically.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Claim Step

```
POST /worker/jobs/claim
```

Claims the next ready step that matches the worker's capabilities. Uses `SELECT FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED` for concurrency safety.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "capabilities": ["shell"]
}
```

**Response (step available):**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "workspace": "default",
  "step_name": "say-hello",
  "action_name": "greet",
  "action_type": "shell",
  "action_image": null,
  "action_spec": {
    "cmd": "echo Hello World && echo 'OUTPUT: {\"greeting\": \"Hello World\"}'",
    "env": {}
  },
  "input": {
    "name": "World"
  }
}
```

The `action_spec` contains the fully resolved action definition with templates already rendered against the job context. The `workspace` field tells the worker which workspace tarball to download.

**Response (no work available):**

```json
{
  "job_id": null,
  "workspace": null,
  "step_name": null,
  "action_name": null,
  "action_type": null,
  "action_image": null,
  "action_spec": null,
  "input": null
}
```

---

### Report Step Start

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/start
```

Marks a step as actively running.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Report Step Complete

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/complete
```

Reports step completion or failure. Triggers the orchestrator to promote dependent steps.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Request body (success):**

```json
{
  "output": { "greeting": "Hello World" },
  "exit_code": 0,
  "error": null
}
```

**Request body (failure):**

```json
{
  "output": null,
  "exit_code": 1,
  "error": "Command exited with code 1"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

When a step completes successfully, the orchestrator checks if any downstream steps now have all their dependencies met and promotes them to `ready` status. When a step fails, downstream steps that depend on it are marked `skipped` (unless they have `continue_on_failure: true`, in which case they are promoted). When all steps are in a terminal state, the job is marked `completed` (or `failed` if any step failed).

---

### Push Logs

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/logs
```

Appends structured log lines to the job's JSONL log file. Called periodically (~1s) during step execution.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "step_name": "say-hello",
  "lines": [
    {"ts": "2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z", "stream": "stdout", "line": "Hello World"},
    {"ts": "2025-02-12T10:56:45.456Z", "stream": "stderr", "line": "warning: unused var"}
  ]
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `step_name` | string (optional) | Step name to attach to each log line |
| `lines` | array | Array of log line objects |
| `lines[].ts` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp |
| `lines[].stream` | string | `"stdout"` or `"stderr"` |
| `lines[].line` | string | The log line content |

The server converts each line into a JSONL entry with a `step` field added (from `step_name`), appends to the job's `.jsonl` file, and broadcasts via WebSocket.

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Download Workspace Tarball

```
GET /worker/workspace/{ws}.tar.gz
```

Downloads a workspace as a gzipped tar archive. Workers use this to get workspace files before executing steps.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)

**Headers:**
- `If-None-Match` (optional) -- Revision ETag for conditional fetch. If the workspace hasn't changed, the server returns `304 Not Modified`.

**Response headers:**
- `Content-Type: application/gzip`
- `X-Revision: {revision}` -- The current workspace revision (content hash for folder sources, commit OID for git sources)
- `ETag: "{revision}"`

**Response:** Binary gzipped tar archive of the workspace directory.

**Status codes:**
- `200` -- Tarball returned
- `304` -- Not Modified (workspace unchanged since the revision in `If-None-Match`)
- `404` -- Workspace not found

**Example:**

```bash
# Download workspace tarball
curl -o workspace.tar.gz \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>" \
  http://localhost:8080/worker/workspace/default.tar.gz

# Conditional fetch (only download if changed)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>" \
  -H 'If-None-Match: "abc123"' \
  http://localhost:8080/worker/workspace/default.tar.gz
```

---

### Complete Job (Local Mode)

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/complete
```

Marks an entire job as completed. Used in local execution mode where the worker handles the full DAG.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "output": { "result": "success" }
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

## Error Responses

All endpoints return errors in a consistent format:

```json
{
  "error": "Description of what went wrong"
}
```

Common HTTP status codes:
- `400` -- Bad request (invalid input, missing fields)
- `401` -- Unauthorized (missing or invalid token)
- `404` -- Not found (unknown task, job, or step)
- `500` -- Internal server error

---

## Configuration

### Auth (optional)

Add an `auth` section to `server-config.yaml` to enable authentication:

```yaml
auth:
  jwt_secret: "your-jwt-secret"
  refresh_secret: "your-refresh-secret"
  providers:
    internal:
      provider_type: internal
  initial_user:
    email: admin@stroem.local
    password: admin
```

- **jwt_secret**: Secret used to sign JWT access tokens (15-minute TTL)
- **refresh_secret**: Secret used for refresh token operations (30-day TTL, rotation on use)
- **providers**: Authentication providers. Currently only `internal` (email/password) is supported. OIDC is planned.
- **initial_user** (optional): Seeds an initial user on server startup if one doesn't already exist

Without the `auth` section, existing API routes continue to work without authentication and auth endpoints return `404`.

### Workspaces

Workspaces define where workflow files are loaded from. The `workspaces` map supports multiple named workspaces with different source types:

```yaml
workspaces:
  default:
    type: folder
    path: ./workspace
  data-team:
    type: git
    url: https://github.com/org/data-workflows.git
    ref: main
    poll_interval_secs: 60
    auth:
      type: token
      token: "ghp_xxx"
```

**Folder source**: Loads workflow files from a local directory path. Computes a content hash as the revision for tarball caching. Supports file watching for hot-reload.

**Git source**: Clones a git repository and loads workflow files from it. Polls for changes at the configured interval. Supports SSH key and token authentication.

Workers download workspace files as tarballs from the server and cache them locally. The tarball endpoint uses ETag-based caching so workers only re-download when the workspace changes.

Commit message:

Make continue_on_failure steps not fail the job
Steps with continue_on_failure: true now have dual semantics: they run
even when dependencies fail (existing), and their own failure is
tolerable — the job completes successfully if all non-tolerable steps
pass. A warning banner in the UI shows which steps failed tolerably.

docs/api-reference.md, after:

# API Reference

Base URL: `http://localhost:8080` (configurable via `server-config.yaml`)

## Public API

Task, job, and log endpoints do not require authentication. Auth endpoints are available when the server is configured with an `auth` section (see Configuration below).

---

### List Workspaces

```
GET /api/workspaces
```

Returns all configured workspaces with task and action counts.

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "name": "default",
    "task_count": 3,
    "action_count": 5
  },
  {
    "name": "data-team",
    "task_count": 2,
    "action_count": 4
  }
]
```

---

### List Tasks

```
GET /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks
```

Returns all tasks from the specified workspace.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hello-world",
    "workspace": "default",
    "mode": "distributed"
  },
  {
    "name": "deploy-pipeline",
    "workspace": "default",
    "mode": "distributed"
  }
]
```

---

### Get Task Detail

```
GET /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks/{name}
```

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)
- `name` -- Task name (e.g., `hello-world`)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "name": "hello-world",
  "mode": "distributed",
  "input": {
    "name": { "type": "string", "default": "World" }
  },
  "flow": {
    "say-hello": {
      "action": "greet",
      "input": { "name": "{{ input.name }}" }
    },
    "shout-it": {
      "action": "shout",
      "depends_on": ["say-hello"],
      "input": { "message": "{{ say_hello.output.greeting }}" }
    }
  }
}
```

---

### Execute Task

```
POST /api/workspaces/{ws}/tasks/{name}/execute
```

Creates a new job for the given task in the specified workspace.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name
- `name` -- Task name

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "input": {
    "name": "World"
  }
}
```

The `input` object is matched against the task's input definition. Missing fields with defaults use the default value. Missing required fields cause an error.

**Response:**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Example:**

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/workspaces/default/tasks/hello-world/execute \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"input": {"name": "World"}}'
```

---

### List Jobs

```
GET /api/jobs
```

**Query parameters:**
- `workspace` (optional) -- Filter by workspace name
- `limit` (optional, default: `50`) -- Number of jobs to return
- `offset` (optional, default: `0`) -- Pagination offset

**Response:**

```json
[
  {
    "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
    "workspace": "default",
    "task_name": "hello-world",
    "mode": "distributed",
    "status": "completed",
    "source_type": "api",
    "source_id": null,
    "created_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:00Z",
    "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
    "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z"
  }
]
```

**Example:**

```bash
curl "http://localhost:8080/api/jobs?limit=10"
```

---

### Get Job Detail

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}
```

Returns job metadata and all steps with their statuses.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "workspace": "default",
  "task_name": "hello-world",
  "mode": "distributed",
  "input": { "name": "World" },
  "output": null,
  "status": "completed",
  "source_type": "api",
  "source_id": null,
  "created_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:00Z",
  "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
  "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z",
  "steps": [
    {
      "step_name": "say-hello",
      "action_name": "greet",
      "action_type": "shell",
      "action_image": null,
      "input": { "name": "World" },
      "output": { "greeting": "Hello World" },
      "status": "completed",
      "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
      "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:01Z",
      "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:02Z",
      "error_message": null
    },
    {
      "step_name": "shout-it",
      "action_name": "shout",
      "action_type": "shell",
      "action_image": null,
      "input": { "message": "Hello World" },
      "output": null,
      "status": "completed",
      "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
      "started_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:02Z",
      "completed_at": "2025-02-10T12:00:03Z",
      "error_message": null
    }
  ]
}
```

**Job statuses:** `pending`, `running`, `completed`, `failed`, `cancelled`

**Step statuses:** `pending`, `ready`, `running`, `completed`, `failed`, `skipped`

- `skipped` -- The step was not executed because a dependency failed (or was itself skipped). Steps with `continue_on_failure: true` are promoted instead of skipped when dependencies fail.

---

### Get Job Logs

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/logs
```

Returns the combined log output from all steps of a job in JSONL format. Each line is a JSON object with `ts`, `stream`, `step`, and `line` fields.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Response:**

```json
{
  "logs": "{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"Hello World\"}\n{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.456Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"OUTPUT: {\\\"greeting\\\": \\\"Hello World\\\"}\"}\n"
}
```

**JSONL line format:**

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `ts` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp of when the line was captured |
| `stream` | string | `"stdout"` or `"stderr"` |
| `step` | string | Step name that produced this line |
| `line` | string | The log line content |

**Backward compatibility:** For jobs created before JSONL format was introduced, the `logs` field may contain legacy plain text. Clients should attempt to parse each line as JSON and fall back to rendering plain text for unparseable lines.

**Example:**

```bash
curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/logs | jq -r .logs
```

---

### Get Step Logs

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/logs
```

Returns the JSONL log output for a specific step within a job. Lines are filtered by the `step` field in each JSON log entry.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Response:**

```json
{
  "logs": "{\"ts\":\"2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z\",\"stream\":\"stdout\",\"step\":\"say-hello\",\"line\":\"Hello World\"}\n"
}
```

For jobs created before JSONL log format was introduced, this endpoint returns an empty string (legacy plain-text lines are skipped).

**Example:**

```bash
curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/steps/say-hello/logs | jq -r .logs
```

---

### Stream Job Logs (WebSocket)

```
GET /api/jobs/{id}/logs/stream
```

Opens a WebSocket connection for real-time log streaming. On connect, the server sends any existing log content (backfill), then streams new log chunks as they arrive from workers.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Protocol:** WebSocket (upgrade from HTTP)

**Behavior:**
1. Server sends existing JSONL log content as a text message (backfill)
2. Server forwards new JSONL log chunks as text messages in real-time
3. Connection stays open until the client disconnects or the server shuts down
4. Each message contains one or more JSONL lines (one JSON object per line)

**Example (websocat):**

```bash
websocat ws://localhost:8080/api/jobs/JOB_ID/logs/stream
```

**Error responses:**
- `400` -- Invalid job ID format

---

## Auth API

Auth endpoints are only available when the server is configured with an `auth` section. Without auth configuration, these endpoints return `404`.

---

### Login

```
POST /api/auth/login
```

Authenticates with email and password. Returns a JWT access token and a refresh token.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "email": "admin@stroem.local",
  "password": "admin"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...",
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Invalid email or password
- `404` -- Auth not configured on this server

**Example:**

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/auth/login \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"email": "admin@stroem.local", "password": "admin"}'
```

---

### Refresh Token

```
POST /api/auth/refresh
```

Exchanges a refresh token for a new access token and refresh token pair. The old refresh token is revoked (rotation).

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...",
  "refresh_token": "f1e2d3c4-b5a6-0987-dcba-0987654321fe"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Invalid or expired refresh token

---

### Logout

```
POST /api/auth/logout
```

Revokes a refresh token.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "refresh_token": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Get Current User

```
GET /api/auth/me
```

Returns the authenticated user's information. Requires a valid JWT access token.

**Headers:**

```
Authorization: Bearer <access_token>
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "user_id": "d1e2f3a4-b5c6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "name": null,
  "email": "admin@stroem.local",
  "created_at": "2025-02-11T10:00:00Z"
}
```

**Error responses:**
- `401` -- Missing or invalid access token

---

## Worker API

All worker endpoints require authentication via the `Authorization` header:

```
Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>
```

The token is configured in `server-config.yaml` (`worker_token` field) and must match the `worker_token` in `worker-config.yaml`.

---

### Register Worker

```
POST /worker/register
```

Registers a worker and returns a unique worker ID. Called once on worker startup.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "name": "worker-1",
  "capabilities": ["shell"]
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

---

### Heartbeat

```
POST /worker/heartbeat
```

Updates the worker's last-seen timestamp. Called periodically.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Claim Step

```
POST /worker/jobs/claim
```

Claims the next ready step that matches the worker's capabilities. Uses `SELECT FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED` for concurrency safety.

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "capabilities": ["shell"]
}
```

**Response (step available):**

```json
{
  "job_id": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
  "workspace": "default",
  "step_name": "say-hello",
  "action_name": "greet",
  "action_type": "shell",
  "action_image": null,
  "action_spec": {
    "cmd": "echo Hello World && echo 'OUTPUT: {\"greeting\": \"Hello World\"}'",
    "env": {}
  },
  "input": {
    "name": "World"
  }
}
```

The `action_spec` contains the fully resolved action definition with templates already rendered against the job context. The `workspace` field tells the worker which workspace tarball to download.

**Response (no work available):**

```json
{
  "job_id": null,
  "workspace": null,
  "step_name": null,
  "action_name": null,
  "action_type": null,
  "action_image": null,
  "action_spec": null,
  "input": null
}
```

---

### Report Step Start

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/start
```

Marks a step as actively running.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "worker_id": "w1w2w3w4-w5w6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Report Step Complete

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/steps/{step}/complete
```

Reports step completion or failure. Triggers the orchestrator to promote dependent steps.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)
- `step` -- Step name

**Request body (success):**

```json
{
  "output": { "greeting": "Hello World" },
  "exit_code": 0,
  "error": null
}
```

**Request body (failure):**

```json
{
  "output": null,
  "exit_code": 1,
  "error": "Command exited with code 1"
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

When a step completes successfully, the orchestrator checks if any downstream steps now have all their dependencies met and promotes them to `ready` status. When a step fails, downstream steps that depend on it are marked `skipped` (unless they have `continue_on_failure: true`, in which case they are promoted). When all steps are in a terminal state, the job is marked `completed` or `failed` depending on the failures: if every failed step has `continue_on_failure: true`, the job is `completed` (with tolerable failures); if any failed step does not have the flag, the job is `failed`.

---

### Push Logs

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/logs
```

Appends structured log lines to the job's JSONL log file. Called periodically (~1s) during step execution.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "step_name": "say-hello",
  "lines": [
    {"ts": "2025-02-12T10:56:45.123Z", "stream": "stdout", "line": "Hello World"},
    {"ts": "2025-02-12T10:56:45.456Z", "stream": "stderr", "line": "warning: unused var"}
  ]
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `step_name` | string (optional) | Step name to attach to each log line |
| `lines` | array | Array of log line objects |
| `lines[].ts` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp |
| `lines[].stream` | string | `"stdout"` or `"stderr"` |
| `lines[].line` | string | The log line content |

The server converts each line into a JSONL entry with a `step` field added (from `step_name`), appends to the job's `.jsonl` file, and broadcasts via WebSocket.

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

### Download Workspace Tarball

```
GET /worker/workspace/{ws}.tar.gz
```

Downloads a workspace as a gzipped tar archive. Workers use this to get workspace files before executing steps.

**Path parameters:**
- `ws` -- Workspace name (e.g., `default`)

**Headers:**
- `If-None-Match` (optional) -- Revision ETag for conditional fetch. If the workspace hasn't changed, the server returns `304 Not Modified`.

**Response headers:**
- `Content-Type: application/gzip`
- `X-Revision: {revision}` -- The current workspace revision (content hash for folder sources, commit OID for git sources)
- `ETag: "{revision}"`

**Response:** Binary gzipped tar archive of the workspace directory.

**Status codes:**
- `200` -- Tarball returned
- `304` -- Not Modified (workspace unchanged since the revision in `If-None-Match`)
- `404` -- Workspace not found

**Example:**

```bash
# Download workspace tarball
curl -o workspace.tar.gz \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>" \
  http://localhost:8080/worker/workspace/default.tar.gz

# Conditional fetch (only download if changed)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <worker_token>" \
  -H 'If-None-Match: "abc123"' \
  http://localhost:8080/worker/workspace/default.tar.gz
```

---

### Complete Job (Local Mode)

```
POST /worker/jobs/{id}/complete
```

Marks an entire job as completed. Used in local execution mode where the worker handles the full DAG.

**Path parameters:**
- `id` -- Job ID (UUID)

**Request body:**

```json
{
  "output": { "result": "success" }
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "status": "ok"
}
```

---

## Error Responses

All endpoints return errors in a consistent format:

```json
{
  "error": "Description of what went wrong"
}
```

Common HTTP status codes:
- `400` -- Bad request (invalid input, missing fields)
- `401` -- Unauthorized (missing or invalid token)
- `404` -- Not found (unknown task, job, or step)
- `500` -- Internal server error

---

## Configuration

### Auth (optional)

Add an `auth` section to `server-config.yaml` to enable authentication:

```yaml
auth:
  jwt_secret: "your-jwt-secret"
  refresh_secret: "your-refresh-secret"
  providers:
    internal:
      provider_type: internal
  initial_user:
    email: admin@stroem.local
    password: admin
```

- **jwt_secret**: Secret used to sign JWT access tokens (15-minute TTL)
- **refresh_secret**: Secret used for refresh token operations (30-day TTL, rotation on use)
- **providers**: Authentication providers. Currently only `internal` (email/password) is supported. OIDC is planned.
- **initial_user** (optional): Seeds an initial user on server startup if one doesn't already exist

Without the `auth` section, existing API routes continue to work without authentication and auth endpoints return `404`.

### Workspaces

Workspaces define where workflow files are loaded from. The `workspaces` map supports multiple named workspaces with different source types:

```yaml
workspaces:
  default:
    type: folder
    path: ./workspace
  data-team:
    type: git
    url: https://github.com/org/data-workflows.git
    ref: main
    poll_interval_secs: 60
    auth:
      type: token
      token: "ghp_xxx"
```

**Folder source**: Loads workflow files from a local directory path. Computes a content hash as the revision for tarball caching. Supports file watching for hot-reload.

**Git source**: Clones a git repository and loads workflow files from it. Polls for changes at the configured interval. Supports SSH key and token authentication.

Workers download workspace files as tarballs from the server and cache them locally. The tarball endpoint uses ETag-based caching so workers only re-download when the workspace changes.
